## Chapter4. Access Control
### types of access control
- discretionary access control(DAC)
  - based on the identity of user \
    ex) linux filesystem
      - user mike can read/write/execute `/home/script.sh``
  - implementations
    - with owner
    - with capabilities
- mandatory access control(MAC)
  - based on hierarchical model representing security level
  - users assigned to clearance level / resources assigned to security label
  - can access clearance level <= the user's clearance level
  - admin: strictly adn exclusively controls access, 
- linux all-or-nothing attitude.
- either super user with all power or normal user with limited access

### Users
- system user(system account)
  - typically used to run background process. daemon
- regular user
- uid convention
  - 0: root(=superuser)
  - 1 \~ 999: reserved for system users
  - 65534: nobody. usecase) mapping remote user to some wellknown id
  - 1000 \~ 65533 , 65536 \~ 4294967294: regular user
```bash
$id -u # uid
```

### managing users locally
- linux provides simple file-based interface with confusing names

  | purpose | file |
  | --- | --- |
  | user database | /etc/passwd | 
  | group database | /etc/group |
  | user passwords | /etc/shadow |
  | group passwords | /etc/gshadow |

- user database
  - user names, uid, group membership, home directory, login shell used, ...
  - etc/passwd
  ```bash
  root:x:0:0:root:/root:/bin/bash
  # user name. <= 32 characters 
  # user password. x means encrypted in /etc/shadow
  # uid
  # gid. see /etc/group
  # user info like full name, phone number. GEOS field
  # user's home directory
  # shell to use. to prevent interactive login, use /sbin/nologin
  ```
  - password are in /etc/shadow, need root privileges
- `adduser` command
  - add user
  - `-r` to create system account
    - disable login shell, and avoid home directory creation
    - see `/etc/adduser.conf`
- group: collection of users

### centralized user management
more than one machine or server
- directory based
  - Lightweight Directory Access Protocol(LDAP)
    - old
    - defines how to access and maintain a distributed directory over Internet Protocol(IP)
    - can run a LDAP server yourself(ex. KeyCloak), or outsource to cloud provider(ex. Azure Active Directory)
    - ref
      - ldap basic: https://ldap.com/basic-ldap-concepts/
      - ldap and authentication(bind operation): https://ldap.com/the-ldap-bind-operation/
    - https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/security/what-is-ldap-authentication
- via network
  - kerberos
    - network authentication developed by MIT
    - well explained: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5N242XcKAsM
    -
- using config management system
  - ansible, chef, puppet, saltstack, ..


> Self-research
### LDAP
- Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
- protocol for accessing and maintaining `directory information service` over internet protocol(ip)
- `directory information service`(=directory service)
  - type of a network database that stores information represented as trees of entries
  - ex) dns
- entry
  - 3 components: distinguished name(dn), a collection of attributes, a collection of object classes
  - dn, rdn
    - dn: distinguished name
      - comprised with one or more rdn
      - uniquely identifies the entry in the directory information tree(DIT)
    - rdn: relative distinguished name
      - comprised of attribute-value pairs
      - ex) `uid=john.doe` (single). `givenName=John+sn=Doe`(multiple pairs)
    - null dn = root
    - in dn, rdn is separated by comma, rdn close to root is positioned on the right
      ```
      uid=john,ou=people,dc=example,dc=come
      <-closer to leaf     closer to root->

      ou=people,dc=example,dc=come: parent
      ```
    - attributes
      - data for an entry
      - attribute type, optional attribute options, set of values
      - attribute type: schema element that how attributes should be handled by LDAP client and server
    - object classes
      - schema elements that specify collections of attribute types that may be related to a particular type of object, process or other entity
- operations
  - search, add, modify, modify dn, compare, delete, extended
  - abandon: stop processing the request. client is not interested anymore
  - bind
    - to establish an authorization identity for subsequent operations processed on that connection \
    and to specify LDAP protocol version that the client will use
    - 2 parts: who/what is authenticating, proof of the identity(ex. password, certificate, ...)
    - with simple authentication or SASL authentication
- ref: https://ldap.com/basic-ldap-concepts/

### SASL
- Simple Authentication and Security Layer
- framework for providing authentication and data security services in connection-oriented protocols via replaceable mechanisms
  - ex) used to prove to the server who you are when accessing IMAP server for email
- provides an abstraction layer between protocols and mechanisms
  ```
                  SMTP    LDAP    XMPP   Other protocols ...
                     \       |    |      /
                      \      |    |     /
                     SASL abstraction layer
                      /      |    |     \
                     /       |    |      \
              EXTERNAL   GSSAPI  PLAIN   Other mechanisms ...
  ```
- challenge-response framework
  - server issues a challenge to the client, client sends a response based on the challenge
- does not specify technology for authentication. responsibility of each SASL mechanism(ex. GSASAPI, ...)
- typical process
  - client request authentication
  - server responds a list of supported mechanism
  - client choose one and exchange data
- ref
  - https://docs.ldap.com/specs/rfc4422.txt
  - https://www.gnu.org/software/gsasl/manual/html_node/SASL-Overview.html
  - https://www.baeldung.com/java-sasl


### kerberos


---

### Permissions
- 3 types/scopes of permissions
  - user: the owner of the file
  - group: has one or more members
  - others: everyone else
- 3 types of access
  - read(r)
    - file: view the content of the file
    - directory: view the names of files in the directory
  - write(w)
    - file: modify and delete file
    - directory: create, rename, delete files in the directory
  - execute(x)
    - file: execute the file if the user also has read permission
    - directory: access file information, change into it(cd), list its content(ls)
  - other file access bits
    - `s`: setuid/getuid permission applied to executable file. A user running it inherits the effective privileges of the owner or group of the file
    - `t`: sticky bit. only for the directory. Prevents nonroot user from the deleting files in it, unless said user owns the directory/file

  
```bash
$ ls -al
-rw-r--r--  1 user  staff    1420618 12 17 13:12 a.png
# file mode / # of hard links / file owner / group / file size in bytes / last modified timestamp / file name
```

- file types used in modes
  | symbol | semantics |
  | --- | --- |
  | - | a regular file |
  | b | block special file |
  | c | character special file |
  | C | high-performance file(contiguous data file) |
  | d | directory |
  | l | symbolic link |
  | p | named pipe(create with mkfifo) |
  | s | a socket |
  | ? | soe other (unknown) file type |

- file permissions
  - per target
  | pattern | effective permission | decimal representation |
  | --- | --- | --- |
  | --- | none | 0 |
  | --x | execute | 1 |
  | -w- | write | 2 |
  | -wx | write and execute | 3 |
  | r-- | read | 4 |
  | r-x | read and execute | 5 |
  | rwx | read and write | 6 |
  | rwx | read, write, execute | 7 |
- examples
  - 755: full access to users / read and write to else
  - 700: full access to users / none to else
  - 644: read/write to users / read only to else
  - 400: read only to users / none to else
- commands
  - `umask`: default permission given to the file when creating new one
  - `chmod`: change permission. ex) `chmod +x`: give executable for all
  - `chown`: change owner
  - `chgrp`: change group

- process permissions
  - real uid: the uid of the user that launched the process. `getuid()`, `stat -c "%u" "%g" /proc/$pid`
  - effective uid: the uid to determine the permission the process has when accessing shared resources such as message queue. Usually identical with real uid but sometimes changed to access resource only permitted to the root.
  - saved set-user-id: when the process switches to lower privileged user id for under-privileged work, original effective user id is saved as saved set-user-id to recover after the task is done
  - filesystem uid
    - linux specific uid. no longer necessary but still supported for compatibility.
    - used to determine the permission for file access. Initially introduced for the usecase where file server acts on behalf of a regular user while isolating the uid change of user
    - usually identical with effective user id
  - initially, when child process is `fork`ed, it copies parent's uids. During `execve()` syscall, real uid is preserved whereas effective uid and saved set-user-id may change.
  - process uid is also used for 
    - get permission to send signals ex kill -9
    - permission handling for scheduling nad priorities
    - checking resource limits
    - ...

### Advanced permission management
- capabilities
  - linux's permission system: traditionally all or nothing view
    - privileged process: by pass kernel permission check. root
    - unprivileged process: non-zero effective uid.
  - fine grained privilege control on a file basis \ 
    normal process has zero capabilities.  You can assign capabilities to executables and processes to do certain tasks
  - examples
    - CAP_CHOWN: allow to make arbitrary changes to files' uid/guid
    - CAP_KILL: allow sending signals to processes belonging to other users
    - CAP_SETUID: allows changing the uid
    - CAP_SETCAP: allow setting the capabilities of a running process
    - CAP_NET_ADMIN: allow various network-relating actions
    - CAP_NET_RAW: allow using RAW and PACKET socket
    - CAP_SYS_CHROOT: allow calling chroot
    - CAP_SYS_ADMIN: allow system admin operations, including mounting filesystem
    - CAP_SYS_PTRACE: allow using strace to debug process
    - CAP_SYS_MODULE: allow loading kernel modules
- seccomp Profiles
  - secure computing mode(seccomp).
  - restict the syscalls a process can use
  - ex used in Docker, Kubernetes
- Access Control List
  - allow granting permissions to a user or a group not in the group list of a user
  - should be enabled when mounting filesystem

### Good practices
- least privileges
- avoid setuid
  - utilize capabilities instead of using setuid
- auditing

