## Chapter5. FileSystems
- most resources in Linux are files

### Basics
- assumptions & expectations
  - most filesystems are hierarchical. starting with root(/)
  - two different types of object: directory, file
  - permissions are built in
  - generally, filesystems are implemented in the kernel \
    optionally implemented in user land(FUSE:Filesystem in Userspace)
- terms
  - drive
    - a (physical) block device. ex) HDD(hard disk drive), SSD(solid disk drive)
    - a drive can be emulated in the context of virtual machine. ex) /dev/sda(SCSI device), /dev/sdb(SATA device), /dev/hda(IDE device)
      - SCSI, SATA, IDE device: hard drive interface types. interface between hard drive and computer
      - https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/types-of-hard-drives-sata-pata-scsi-and-more-2/
      - https://www.linkedin.com/advice/3/what-pros-cons-sata-ide-scsi-hard-drive
      - ATA(AT Bus Attachment. Advanced Technology Attachment)
      - PATA(Parallel Advanced Technology Attachment. Parallel ATA)
        - =IDE(Integrated Drive Electronics). first ATA
        - standard interface that defines the connection between a bus on a computer motherboard and disk storage device
        - Originally drive controllers and disks were implemented as separate devices, often built by different manufacturers and were located separately, usually . IDE refers to the drive controller is integrated in the drive.
        - use parallel signalling(=transfer multiple bits of data simultaneously)
      - SATA(Serial Advanced Technology Attachment)
        - superseded PATA
        - transfer one bit at a time
        - faster transmission date(150-300 MB/S)
        - thinner cable ad limit of 
      - SCSI(Small Computer System Interface)
        - drive itself has a processor. -> performance of drive is not dependent on the computer's spec
        - widely used in servers
        - better than SATA.
      - NVMe(Non-volatile Memory Express)
        - interface for non-volatile storage media usually attached via the PCI Express bus
        - designed to capitalize low latency and internal parallelism of SSD
    - partition
      - Drive can be logically split up into partitions.
      - ex) /dev/sdb1, /dev/sdb2
    - volume
      - similar to partition, but more flexible
       - a storage area that can be accessed using a single file system. can have multiple partitions
      - formatted for specific filesystem
    - super block
      - special section in the filesystem that contains metadata of the filesystem
      - includes filesystem type, blocks, state, how many inodes per block
    - inodes
      - store metadata about file, such as size, owner, location, data, and permission
      - does not contain filename and actual data.

- Partition vs Volume
  - Partition: just a split of drive(physical device)
  - Volume: once a “partition” has been formatted, assigned a file system and drive letter it becomes a “volume” capable of storing data with which the user can interact
  - ref: https://davescomputertips.com/differences-between-disk-drive-partition-volume/
- commands

  | command | use case |
  | --- | --- | 
  | lsblk | list all block device |
  | fdisk, parted | manage disk partition |
  | blkid | show block device attributes such as uuid |
  | hwinfo | show hardware info |
  | file -s | show filesystem and partition information |
  | stsat, df -i, ls -i | show and lst inode-related information |

- links
  - hard link
    - directory reference(entry) to inodes. creating another path to the file. effect of aliasing
    - can't create hard link to directory. due to risk of circular reference
    - can not create across filesystem. File is identified by the inode number which is unique in the filesystem. Thus file can not be indexed with same inode in different file system
  - symbolic link, symlink: special file with their content being a string representing the path of another file

### The Virtual File System
- Linux provides file-like access to many sorts of resources through an abstraction called virtual file system(vfs)
- VFS is an abstraction layer in the kernel that provides clients a common way to access resources, based on the file diagram.
- file does not have predescribed structure. jst a stream of bytes. interpreting it is up to the client
- VFS abstracts access to different kinds of filesystems
  - Local file system
    - ext3, xfs, fat, nfts
    - use drivers to access local block devices such as HDD, SSD
  - in memory filesystem
    - tmpfs that are not backed by RAM
  - pseudo filesystem
    - procf
    - inmemory in nature. used for kernel interfacing and device abstractions
  - network filesystem
    - nfs, samba, netware
    - use driver. the storage devices are at remote. -> driver inolves network operation
- operations of VFS

  | category | examples |
  | --- | --- |
  | category | examples |
| inodes | chomod, chown, stat |
| files | open, close, seek, truncate, read, write |
| directories | chdir, getcwd, link, unlink, rename, symlink |
| filesystems | mount, flush, chroot |
| others | mmap, poll, sync, flock |