## Chapter7. Networking

- almost every protocol and interface is based on publicly available specifications
- IETF(Internet Engineering Task Force) makes all of those requests of comments(RFCs) freely available via [datatracker.ietf.org](https://datatracker.ietf.org/)

## TCP/IP Stack

- each layer must be able to communicate with only the layers right above and below itself
- data is encapsulated in packets, and each layer typically wraps the data in a header
- `header + payload` of a higher layer makes up the payload for the next layer

### overview

- link layer
  - the lowest layer. covers the hardware(Ethernet, Wifi) and kernel drivers.
  - focus how packets are sent between physical device
- internet layer
  - with IP(Internet Protocol), do routing. that is, sending packets between machines
- transport layer
  - communication between hosts
  - kinds
    - TCP(Transmission Control Protocol) for session-based, reliable communication
    - UDP(User Datagram Protocol) for connection-less communication
  - how packets are transmitted, including addressing individual services on a machine via port. also socket
- the application layer
  - user facing tooling and apps.
  - web, ssh, mail

### the link layer

- ethernet
  - network that uses wires to connect machines. LAN
- wireless(wifi)
  - communication protocol and method that uses electromagnetic waves
- MAC address
  - MAC: media access control.
  - unique 48-bit identifier for hardware, used to identify machine(precisely, network interface)
- interface
  - a network connection. can be a physical interface or a virtual interface like loopback

#### Network Interface controller(NIC)

- or, Network Interface card
- hardware equipment that transforms digital representation of bytes <-> electrical/electromagnetic signals
- traditional way: ifconfig. modern way: ip link show
- ex) traditional
  ```bash
  % ifconfig
  lo0: flags=8049<UP,LOOPBACK,RUNNING,MULTICAST> mtu 16384
      options=1203<RXCSUM,TXCSUM,TXSTATUS,SW_TIMESTAMP>
      inet 127.0.0.1 netmask 0xff000000
      inet6 ::1 prefixlen 128
      inet6 fe80::1%lo0 prefixlen 64 scopeid 0x1
      nd6 options=201<PERFORMNUD,DAD>
  ```
  - mtu(maximum transmission unit) packet size 65,536 bytes. \
    for historical reasons, ethernet was 1,500 bytes but can use jumbo frames(9,000 bytes in size)
- ex 2)

  ```
  en0: flags=8863<UP,BROADCAST,SMART,RUNNING,SIMPLEX,MULTICAST> mtu 1500
      options=6463<RXCSUM,TXCSUM,TSO4,TSO6,CHANNEL_IO,PARTIAL_CSUM,ZEROINVERT_CSUM>
      ether 74:a6:cd:da:9d:1d
      inet6 fe80::1c7a:656b:abc6:1a4c%en0 prefixlen 64 secured scopeid 0xc
      inet 100.71.56.12 netmask 0xfffff800 broadcast 100.71.63.255
      nd6 options=201<PERFORMNUD,DAD>
      media: autoselect
      status: active
  ```

  - `inet 100.71.56.12`: ip address \
    `ether 74:a6:cd:da:9d:1d`: mac address

#### Address Resolution Protocol(ARP)

- map MAC address to IP address
- command: `arp` or `ip neigh`(modern way)

  ```
  $ arp
  Address                  HWtype  HWaddress           Flags Mask            Iface
  10.106.164.4             ether   70:db:98:96:39:27   C                     eth0
  gateway                  ether   00:00:0c:9f:f0:0a   C                     eth0
  172.17.0.2                       (incomplete)                              docker0
  10.106.164.3             ether   00:a3:8e:5d:90:b7   C                     eth0
  169.254.169.254                  (incomplete)
  ```

### The Internet Layer

- routing packet from one machine to another
- assumptions: network infra is unreliable and the participants change frequently
- best-effort delivery(no guarantees on best performance)
- treats every packet as independent
- thus, higher layer(typically transport layer) handles reliability issue. ex) packet order, retries, delivery guarantees

#### IPv4

- 32 bit number for identifying host or process. segmented into four 8-bits
- ip header defined in RFC 791

  - source address(32bit)
  - destination address(32bit)
  - protocol(8bit)
  - time to live, aka ttl(8bit)
  - type of service(8bit)

- CIDR(Classless Inter-Domain Routing)
  - ex) 10.0.0.0/24
  - first 24 bits represents network
  - last 8 bits are the ip address available for hosts
- reserved ip addresses
  - 127.0.0.0: local address
  - 169.254.0.0/16(169.254.0.0 ~ 169.254.255.255/16)
    - link local addresses. that is, packets sent there should not be forwarded to other parts of the network
    - some cloud providers like AWS us this for special services
  - 224.0.0.0/24(224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255)
    - for multicast

#### IPv6
